Testing, one, two, three.
This is an interview with Dr. Mark Troy by Marshall
McInnes on May the 11th, 1993 at Texas A&M
University concerning his days in college, the
Peace Corps, and his feelings about the Vietnam
War. In the interest of accumulating knowledge, I
am asking you to donate this tape to me or the Texas
A&M oral history collection in the university
archives. Is that all right with you? That's fine.
What is your full name? Mark Edward Troy. And when
and where were you born? St. Louis, Missouri,
February 22, 1947. And what is your education? I
have a doctorate in psychology from the
University of Hawaii.
Now we'll get into some of the interview
questions. What year did you enter college, and
where did you go to school? I entered college in
1965. I entered a seminary in 1965. I was in there
for a year and a half. In January 1967, I entered
Quincy College in Quincy, Illinois. All right,
describe the college in terms of its size, the
attitudes of the students and faculty, and just
the general air about the campus at the time you
entered the college at Quincy. Quincy College?
All right, Quincy was a small Catholic liberal
arts college at that time. It had about 2,000
students. Some of the faculty were Franciscan
priests. Some of them were laypersons.
students were kind of a mix of students in terms of
social attitudes. Some of them were
fairly conservative, others were fairly
liberal. They kind of spanned the whole spectrum.
Since it was a Catholic co-ed college, you tended
to have students who were
fairly religious in some ways. If you weren't
somehow religiously oriented, it wasn't too
likely that you'd go there. We didn't have
fraternities or sororities, but we did have
service organizations, which were fairly fairly
popular.
Were there any demonstrations on campus during
the time you were there? If there were, what kinds
and over what?
There were several demonstrations, but they
weren't sit-in type demonstrations or anything
like that. There was one vigil I remember for for
peace. There was some concern, some unrest, I
guess, shortly after the Democratic National
Convention in 1968. A lot of students were angry
about that. Some of the other protests mainly,
I guess, Just large groups of people meeting in
front of the residence halls concerned more the
hours and some of the restrictions on the
residence halls than anything else. And what did
you do after you left Quincy? Excuse me a second.
After Quincy, I went to Washington University in
St. Louis to get a master's degree. And after that,
after getting my master's degree, I joined the
Peace Corps. Were you ever considering
volunteering for service in the United States
Armed Services? And how did you feel about the
lottery once it was established? OK, and those are
a couple questions, actually.
Service in the Armed Services. Yeah, in fact, I did
volunteer. I did pretty much what? What Bill
Clinton did, when I went to graduate school, I
signed up for ROTC. And the
problem was that it was easier to get into ROTC than
it was to get into graduate school. And it's the one
that came down to actually making the commitment,
going to summer camp officers candidate school
training between graduation and Washington U. I
still hadn't been accepted at Washington U. I
hadn't been accepted anywhere, and so I couldn't
accept the officers candidate school thing. I had
to decline that. So
that was the one consideration I had with
volunteering. Then when I did finally get
accepted into Washington U, it was too late and I
could not get back into OCS. The summer was over,
the summer training was over, and Washington U's
ROTC was already filled.
The lottery, well, that was the one thing that got
me out of the draft, I was fairly happy for that.
Because I had one whole semester in graduate
school where
the concern about the draft was a problem. I was
already engaged, I wanted to stay in graduate
school, but I was also eligible for the draft. I was
classified 1A and I made it into the lottery just at
the time that all my appeals had run out.
What were the attitudes of the students and
professors at Washington when you entered? Well,
Washington U was fairly liberal in terms of its
politics. It was among the universities in the St.
Louis area and probably in the Midwest, it's
probably the most liberal in its outlook.
Although you still have fairly conservative
professors there, but for the most part you also
had a large number of very liberal professors and
the students that went there tended to be fairly
liberal. Even though they did have in ROTC on
campus, and students did participate in that.
Well, it filled up all the slots. For the most part,
I would say the students were very liberal. Did you
participate in any campus activities, protests,
demonstrations at Washington? Yeah,
after Kent State I participated in a number of
demonstrations there. There were some
demonstrations at Washington U prior to Kent
State. One was around the ROTC building. I didn't
participate in that. I didn't really think that
that was right. I didn't see anything wrong with
students being in ROTC.
the Kent State protests and particularly after
the incursion into Cambodia and everything. I was
opposed to the war and I didn't like the actions of
the National Guard after Kent or the incursion
into Cambodia. So, Washington, you actually was
one of the universities that went on strike and
shut down, the students shut it down over the Kent
State protests, and I took part in those. Describe
your initial feelings about the Vietnam War,
specifically on America's involvement in the
war.
Well, my initial feelings were that
I supported the war. When I started hearing about
the war in high school, I was primarily a supporter
of the war. I supported the domino theory and that
sort of thing. Actually, in high school I was a
member of group that supported Goldwater for
Presidents in the 1964 campaign. It was primarily
because of his position on Vietnam.
Q How did your family feel about the war?
A
My family, for the most part, was opposed to the
war. It's hard to say when
they began to be opposed to it.
My father was probably one of the first people I
knew who was opposed to the war in Vietnam. And I'm
not sure exactly when he took that position. I'm
not sure exactly what his position the Goldwater
Johnson campaign was either, but at least among
all the adults I knew he was the first person to be
opposed to it. Was there any specific incident
which made you for or against the war in Vietnam?
I don't know that there was any specific incident.
There were certain incidents I recall, and
my opinions on it changed over time. The first time
that I really began to think deeply about the war
was
the battle, the Yad Drang battle. And my first
response to that, I remember this, was that It was
the first time North Vietnamese regulars were
involved in the war. And my response was, my God,
that's unfair. What are those guys doing in there?
Of course,
their regular army were fighting our regular
army, is the thing. It seems silly now to call that
unfair. But at the time, it was. And I was still
leaning more towards supporting the war in
Vietnam. That was also the first time that I knew of
anybody that was killed in Vietnam. There was a
brother, a friend of mine, who was killed in that
particular battle, and so I had kind of mixed
feelings.
But that also caused a lot of discussion among
myself and my friends and all that about the war. It
became probably the main topic.
The next incident that I recall was another friend
of mine who was killed. This guy was a guy that was
about two years ahead of me. He was a seminarian. We
didn't have fish camp or anything like that. But we
did have guys from the older classes who would make
it their responsibility to take care of the
freshmen and so on when they came in. And he was one
of those guys. And so he was a real good friend and
everything. He decided at some point that he
didn't want to be a priest and left the seminary.
And generally, that meant that he got drafted
before he could do anything else. And so he was
killed about five days after getting to Vietnam.
And it was one of those incidents we, a
couple friends of mine and I went out. We were
watching a movie. We were watching a documentary
on Vietnam. We came back. I think we came back to my
house. And the phone just started ringing off the
hook because the news had come out that this guy had
gotten killed. So all of us were just calling each
other and everything. It was one of those times
when you really start to feel angry. And that
probably changed me a lot, although by that time I
think I had
become opposed to it and talked to a lot of people
and everything and was opposed to the
involvement. But that was an incident that made me
real angry about it. When did you leave Washington
and what did you do after you left? I left
Washington U at the
beginning of 1972 to join the Peace Corps.
Alright, and where did you go in the Peace Corps? I
was in Thailand. And where were you located in
Thailand? The first spot was a location
sort of in the north central area called Pits on the
Loak. And did you go by yourself or did someone else
go with you? Well, my wife went with me. We were
married at the time. Were there any signs of the
Vietnam War where you were located in Thailand?
Yeah, we had a
lot of indications all over Thailand. Thailand
was... both major R&R area for soldiers from
Vietnam, and there were also a lot of bases there,
active bases, most of them air bases that were
involved in bombing. Where we were actually
located was not considered a military town, but
the
The Thai Army had a headquarters there. I can't
remember which army. I think it was the Thai 4th
Army, but I'm not certain about that. And so
associated with that was a group of advisors. I
think there were probably about a dozen in the
unit. It was called JUSMAC, Joint U.S. Military
Advisory Command. It was either JUSMAC for
command or JUSMAG for group, and I think they used
both terms. They were primarily officers. I don't
think that there were... any enlisted men, mainly
officers, and their headquarters was not too far
from us, just a few blocks actually, and so we'd see
them all the time. They were friendly guys. We'd go
sit around and talk with them a lot, just to kind of
get an idea of what was going on and everything.
There was also a radar station there that was an
installation used by the planes leaving some of
the other military bases heading towards
Vietnam.
How did you feel about the war once you reached
Thailand? Did your feelings change?
Funny thing, in
a lot of ways my feelings were in response to the
Thais' feelings about the war. The Thais were very
supportive of the war in Vietnam, at least the Thai
government was. And one of the problems was that
the
government was, for the most part when we were
there, was a fairly oppressive military
government. Well, I shouldn't say it was fairly
oppressive. It was a military government. Maybe
in terms of dictatorships, it was less oppressive
than some of the others that we're familiar with.
But still, they ran the country in what I
considered an oppressive type of manner. There
was not a lot of free thought, speech, movement,
that sort of thing. And a lot of the people, Thais
themselves, tend to like
that. It's not that they were really chafing under
this type of government. They
like strong leaders. They have a monarchy and have
always had a monarchy. And they like the fact that
their military leaders are are strong.
What I would hear from Thais when I talked to them
was that they liked Nixon because Nixon seemed
like a powerful figure to them. And so I'd get into
conversations and I would try to tell them on my
side that I thought that the law was wrong and that I
didn't like the things he was doing to their
country.
small cities of prostitutes building up around
the air bases. You had rampant inflation. You had
all
sorts of problems that seemed like they were the
result of the
military presence being in Thailand.
funny thing happened. After Saigon fell, the
Thais did very much of an about-face, and this
strain of anti-Americanism developed.
So I found myself on the other side now. They were
saying many of the things that I'd been saying
before, but now I found myself defending much of
the American position in the world and the
response to communism. So in many ways it was, I did
do a complete about-face, but I
adjusted my positions a little bit. I took a more
moderate position, I guess. in response to more
radical Thai positions at that point. What did the
soldiers that you talked to in Thailand, how did
they feel about the war, the advisor group?
Well, they were professional soldiers. They were
there because the military was their career and
they were strongly supportive of the U.S.
involvement.
So our discussions there tended to be more,
well, Basically, we pretty much knew each other's
position and so we didn't get into heated debates
about it. About the only time that we did get into
debates was, and this wasn't even a real debate,
but it was just a little discussion, was in the
Nixon-McGovern election in 72.
to file an absentee ballot, we had to take it over to
the commander of the base to get it authorized. You
know, he had to sign it in, and so we got into a little
discussion then. He said that his vote would
cancel one of our votes, and so then we started
talking about, you know, the various positions in
the election.
Would you like to describe your involvement
within the student movement while you were at
college and elaborate on some of the things that
you did that you felt that were important in the
movement? Well,
most of my involvement was when I was at Washington
U.
Quincy College wasn't terribly involved in in
large-scale protests, partly because it was a
small college and
the town itself was a fairly conservative
community. On the other hand, the faculty, in many
ways, were willing to go along with the protests.
They were present at one protest vigil we had and
everything like that. At Washington U, it was a lot
different. is located right in St. Louis. It draws
students from all over the world. Like I said,
they're fairly liberal. There's a whole
community around Washington U, even though St.
Louis itself is a fairly conservative city. The
community that surrounds Washington U is itself
very liberal, and so there were quite a number of
organizers on campus, student organizers, and
many of them were involved in the strike after the
Kent State incident. And so there were rallies all
the time. In fact, it was very exciting. The
Washington U is designed as one of these real old
universities with all the buildings surrounding
the quadrangle.
which is the central focus of the university. And
so you'd go to Washington U, and you'd walk through
the Quadrangle, and there would just be all these
people there holding rallies and speakers set up.
A lot of activists came to the university,
nationally known activists. Some were on the
faculty. Barry Comner, who was an environmental
activist, was on the faculty. And of course, the
environmental activists also got involved in the
peace movement and so on. Many of the faculty were
involved in that. David Harris, Joan Baez's
husband, ex-husband, came to the campus I think at
least once and spoke. So I was involved in a lot of
marches, a lot of protests, a lot of
demonstrations.
One of the things that happened during the strike
was that they attempted to coordinate it with all
the other universities to coordinate the
activities. They wanted to shut down
universities all across the country. They wanted
to have all sorts of demonstrations planned in all
the cities. So I was involved with one of the
committees at Washington U that was coordinating
that, actually. There were a lot of committees.
And my only real act of civil disobedience in that
whole thing was I needed to contact one other
university and didn't have any money to do it. I
called up a radio station that was billed as an
outlaw radio station and asked them if they had a
phone number that I could use, a credit card number
that I could charge. I guess probably not a credit
card, but a number that I could charge a call to. And
they gave me a number. And when I asked who it was,
they said it was the White House's number. and that
I should just use Nixon's name. So I did. I placed a
call and said I wanted to charge it to this number.
And they asked, well, who do I charge it to? And I
said to charge it to RM Nixon, N-I-X-O-N. And they
accepted the call without question. I have no idea
if that was actually his number. But at least I got
the call through. I think it went to Brown
University or someplace like that. But that was my
only thing with civil disobedience. The other
people I was involved with during the protest
movement were people like the American Friends
Service Committee, the Quakers, basically, who
were pacifists. I wasn't a pacifist, but I did go to
them for draft counseling. The interesting thing
about that was that They gave me a list of
procedures to follow in constructing and making
an appeal
to appeal my draft status. And the idea was that
you, according to the law, you had to have your
appeal within this X number of days and so on. And
the boards met on specific days. And you could buy
time by counting the days and then hand-carrying
your appeal in. You waited until you had 30 days,
and I think the board met once a month. So once I got
the notice and I counted the days and found out when
the next board meeting was going to be held, and I'd
go in and deliver my appeal after that board
meeting because then they couldn't consider that
appeal until the next board meeting and so on and so
on. Instead of 30 days, I'd get 60 days on it and so
on. The American Defense Service Committee
worked all that out for me. But the interesting
thing about that was that
my draft board were kind of cool guys. I don't know
how other people's draft boards were, but I went to
my first meeting with the draft board, my appeal
hearing. You had to request a personal appearance
before the draft board. That was one of the first
steps. So I went to them. and requested an appeal on
the basis of being a graduate student. They denied
it, but they also said, but now these are the next
steps you can take. And they were exactly the same
steps that the American Friends Service
Committee had told me to take. It was just count the
days, and this is when we're going to meet, and so
you bring in the letter afterwards and all that,
which kind of floored me that They were giving me
all that appeal information. Then my next contact
with the draft board was when we went to Thailand.
Even though I had a high number in the lottery, I was
still eligible for the draft. I was still
classified as 1A status. In actual fact, I was out
of the draft. Technically, I wasn't. So I had to get
permission from my draft board. So I went to the
draft board to get the paperwork done, get all the
permission. A woman asked me where I was going. I
said, well, I'm going to Thailand. And she said,
we've been trying all these years to keep you guys
out of there, and now you want to go? And I said,
well, yeah, that's right. Which I thought was kind
of a... cool thing for them to do, too.
I love.
Every
night and every day. Yes, I love you for all the
wrong reasons. Cause you love me in all the right
ways.
I was a-walkin' down Broadway New York, New York
Turnin' llama boots and a stepson hat Proud to be a
country boy Just then a messenger called me Asked a
man on the road He said, you gotta get the rhythm of
the islands Help me carry my load. You got to get
into reggae cowboy. Shuffle them boots on the
street. Get into reggae cowboy. Feeling reggae.
live my life these days i sit in my garden soft
refrains on a steel guitar beautiful rhythms on
the trade winds blowing into a florida farm they
tell me get into reggae cowboy
Get into reggae, cowboy. Feel that reggae beat.
Hey, hey, hey.
Get into Reggae Cowboy Get into Reggae Cowboy Get
into Reggae Cowboy
A
redneck
girl likes to cruise in daddy's pickup
truck Any redneck girl plays her heart when she's
down on her luck
Livin' for a Friday afternoon
I pray that someday I will find me a redneck girl.
A redneck girl likes to stay out all night long.
She makes sweet rock and roll while she listens to
the country songs.
I will
find me a redneck girl
a redneck girl
give me a give me a give me a redneck girl
redneck girl got her name on the back of her belt
is howling
out on the prairie first comes love and then comes
marriage and i pray that someday i will find me a
redneck girl
Oh baby,
stoned on your love. Baby, I've got to say, baby,
you're driving me mad.
Baby, I've got to say, baby, I've got to say you're
good.
baby I'm gone on your sweetness oh baby
stoned on your love I got a strong weakness I got a
strong weakness I got a strong weakness baby I got a
strong
Forget about her eyes that dance around like
diamonds in the night. Forget about her hair that
cascades like a fountain in the moonlight.
And don't think of her sweet lips that leave me just
as drunk as any wine.
Though her body is immortal,
I love her mine.
She always thinks of new ways to take me from the
heat into the fire. Oh, it's heaven when your lover
knows all your desires.
And when I'm lying there beside her In the
afterglow of love I feel so fine
And if I have to name my favorite place
Just when I think I've figured her out She comes up
with a new game Something she made up in that pretty
head And when I can no longer hold out And I'm
melting there in her flame She takes my hand and
leads to that feather bed Oh, that bed
Poets always dwell on All the things that can be
seen
From her nose to her toes
And everything between
Though I'll admit that I'm a slave To her beauty,
let me say it two more times
The way she uses it to love
me I love her mine
Because she uses it to love me
Or the sunshine in the sky And there's a reason Why
I'm feeling so high Must be the season When that
love light shines All
around us So let that feeling Grab you deep inside
And send you reeling Where your love can't hide And
then go stealing Through the moonlit
Just let your love flow like a mountain stream.
For the warm, sweet nights, there's a reason. For
the candle lights must be the season. Windows
love right to shine all around us. So let that
wonder take you into space and lay you under. It's
loving embrace just feel the thunder.
Just
let your love flow Like a mountain stream And let
your love grow With the smallest of dreams And let
your love show
Just
let
your love flow like a mountain stream and let your
love grow with the smallest of dreams and let your
love show and you'll know what I mean.
If I said you have a beautiful body, would you hold
it against me?
If I swore you were an angel, would you treat me like
the devil tonight?
If I was dying of thirst, would you flow in love,
don't quench me. If I said you have a beautiful
body,
We could talk all night about the weather. Could
tell you about my friends out on the coast.
If I was dying of thirst,
would you throw
your love on me?
The rain can fall so soft against the window
The sun can shine so bright up in the sky
But daddy always told me don't make small talk He
said come on out and say
If the body,
would
you hold it against me? If I swore you were an angel,
would you treat me like the devil tonight? If I was
dying of thirst, would you blow a love gun against
me? If I said you have a beautiful body, would you
hold it against me?
If you have a beautiful body, would you hold it
against me? If I swore you were an angel, would you
treat me like the devil tonight?